Manhatten: A Bike Story

What phenomena can we uncover from examinations of the CitiBike data from April of 2019 and April of 2020?
Especial concerns of the managers of the program are what types of people are using the bikes, how we can
encourage other folks to use the system, which stations are most popular with which people on which days,
and how COVID has impacted ridership of all sorts. 

Slide 1: Manhatten Stations
There are 46 stations in the Lower East side of Manhatten. This expoloration of ridership data between
April 2019 and April 2020 examines the patterns of total ridership between those two months and also the
differences in gender usage between the years and among the different stations.This data can be used to
adjust placements of stations to encourage usage by different rider groups or to streamline restocking
of stations on weekdays or weekends. 

Slide 2: Users by Gender, 2019 v 2020
First, a little background. There are a multiple demographics that utilize the Citibikes. The gender 
categories are Male, Female, and Other. Here's how they play out in 2019 v 2020: 
Females and Others increased as a proportion of ridership in 2020, but overall numbers of all 
demographics are significantly lower. Please note the differences in scale between the years. 

Slide 3: Ages of Genders
The ages of the gender demographics are fairly comparable for males and females. The sharp spike and 
the hovering around the x-axis for Gender_Other leads one to suspect that 1970 is the default birth for
users entering their data, a date that the users did not bother to specify, which might also 
be the case with the lack of gender specificity. 

Slide 4: Station Usage by Gender
The gender categories use different stations around lower Manhatten. The Gender_Other category 
concentrates around the input/output of major thoroughfares, implying that perhaps they are commuting 
from outer buroughs. Females and Others use different and fewer stations in Lower Manhatten than males. 

Slide 5: Trip Length 2019 v 2020
Now let's start looking at year to year data. There are sharp spikes around the first of the month, 
possibly when people aspire to non-motorized commuting before falling off the wagon, metaphorially 
speaking. Again, please note the scale of the visualizations. The length of trip declined 
significantly in 2020.

Slide 6: Weekdays v Weekends
The stations are used differently on weekdays v weekends. Weekdays are concentrated in the interior 
of the city. Weekends show more activity near the input/output areas, likely reflecting people commuting 
in for weekend events rather than workweek laborers. 

Slide 7: Weekdays 2019 v 2020
Things changed a lot between 2019 and 2020. In 2019, weekday trips were concentrated in the Lower East 
Side district of 07310/07302 (zip codes). In 2020, trips were must more dispsered around the center 
of the island, perhaps indicating that these trips were made for purposes other than workweek commuting.

Slide 8: Weekends, 2019 v 2020
Weekend trips in 2020 were also notably different than in 2019. the concentration of trips shifted 
from the southern major-thoroughfare entry point to the eastern one. There were also fewer trips into 
the central district. One point of interest is that the station at Hoboken Ave. does not appear on the 
2019 map, but is prominent on the 2020 map. 

Slide 9: Overall Trips Taken, 2019 v 2020
You can see that trips declined by two-thirds between April 2019 and April 2020. The obvious attribution
for this is the COVID-related lockdowns experienced by NYC in 2020. 

Conclusion: 
In 2020, a higher proportion of females and gender_others used the CitiBikes, but many fewer people 
overall took trips. The stations used changed notably, spreading farther apart and becoming less 
concentrated in central districts, which also reflects the pre-COVID patterns of females and gender_others.
Weekend and weekday patterns also changed, showing different points of entry and exit. More time and 
research is needed to determine how 2021 will fare...

Working with the data results that we have, suggestions can be made for moving bikes to the most-used
stations depending on which genders are most likely to be using the bikes, on weekends or weekdays.
Further analysis of what commonalities the stations most used by females and gender_others have could
be done. Placing additional stations where non-males are likely to use them could encourage additional
ridership by other folks. 